 
 
 
 
 
 
figFigure []

Introduction To Reinforcement Learning
Felipe Glicério Gomes Marcelino
18 April 2020

Slide 3

Today's Lecture


    Definition of a Markov decision process
    Definition of reinforcement learning problem
    Anatomy of a RL algorithm
    Brief overview of RL algorithm types


    Goals:
        
            Understand definitions  notation
            Understand the underlying reinforcement learning objective
            Get a summary of possible algorithms
        
Slide 4

Some observations:

    Behavioral Cloning works with partial observations (), but
    Dagger assumption about error   is only possible with fully observations states ()

Slide 5

Reward functions


    Reward functions tell us which states and actions are better.
    Finds out a good reward function is one of the toughest problems in reinforcement learning.
    Objective: Taking actions that will maximize long-term rewards rather than rewards at immediate next
        step
    Markov decision process definition: 

Slide 8

Markov Chain

Definitions: 







    (1) - Probability of go to state  from 
    (2) -  is a vector of probabilities
    (3) - Matrix - Probability of going at a state i given that currently state J
    (4) - then 



    .png
Markov Chain

fig:markovchain shows how is a markov chain graphic model. 



Slide 9 - 10

Markov Decision Process


Defitions:





    Markov Process



Slide 12-14



    Markov chain with augmentation state space

fig:markovprocess and fig:markovprocesscomp show how is a markov process graphic model and
markov chain with augmentation state space.

The goal of reinforcement learning. Markov decision giving us:




 is a trajectory. It is easy to see that adding the policy inside , the MDP models transform to a markov
chain. Using above, we want find out the best parameters to maximize the expectation of reward:




Using MDP definition above, all actions are possible on all states. But, it is possible to put negative rewards
when some actions is illegal given a specific state. Or maybe remap illegal actions to do something else.

Tip: 


Redefining the state space to group the S and A, it is possible using the graphic model in
fig:markovprocesscomp3(Markov Chain). So the probability of next state and the next action given the current
stete and current action is just obtained by multiplying together  transition dynamics of the original MDP and the
policy.




    Markov chain notation using A and S space together.

Slide 15

Finite Horizon Case: State-Action Marginal


    




    Transition Operation


 can be pushing inside the , by linearity of expectations. And because the term inside the sum
only depends on  and , I can rewrite it instead of having it be an expectation over all trajectoreis, I
can have it be expectation over just   and , that calls state action marginal 

Slide 16

Infinite Horizon case: Stationary Distribution
Now, if  =  ? Considering:






 converges to a stationary distribution. Therefore, . Solving  result in Stationary Distribution. OBS:  is eigenvector of .  It means that the
distribution over  doesn't change after a transition.  Stationary distribution.

As T go to  in eq:stationary, the sum becomes dominate by terms of stationary distribution. However, the
result of  over  is . So, is necessary to adding a new term to have well-defined answer and sum up
to something finite. The term
is . It is called Undiscounted Average Return Formulation of RL. Then the optimal policy can be
represent as follows:



Slide 18



    Finite Horizon

fig:horizon shows as we don't care about the reward of a particular trajectory, we care about the
expectation reward average over all the trajectories that could happen. Dealing with expectation is better because
expectation functions are smooth, and they are better to derivate. 


Slides 26-29

Again, maximize the expectation of reward is what we want to. So, how do we deal with all this expectation?

Maximize: 

We can express the equation eq:expectation as a recursive way:


Simplified equation eq:expectation is:



If we know , the policy can be modified to improve the reward expectation. For instance: Maximize the
probability of the action  so that the probability of  if 

Definition: Q-function

: total reward
from taking  in  for the rest of trajectory. Evaluate it  exactly is intractable, but is is possible to
use some algorithms to approximate Q-values. 

Definition: Value-Function

It is similar to Q-Function, but not taking into account the action as input for calculations.

: total reward from
. Using Q-function to express the Value-function: sum of all actions  (Expectation)
. As a result, maximize the value in expectation of
at the first state, consequently maximizes the total expected reward of the entire policy. 


How to use Q-Functions and Value-Functions to improve



    Ideas to improve policy

Idea 2 in fig:ideas have been using in actor-critic models.


Slide 30-35

Types of RL Algorithms



Policy Gradients:

Directly differentiate the equation eq:objective. Diagram in fig:Policy



    Policy-Gradients Diagram



Value-Based

Estimate value function or Q-function of the optimal policy without representing the policy explicitly.  Only keep
tracking Q or V and improve these two functions through an iterative procedure. Diagram in fig:valuefunction



    Value-Function Diagram


Actor-Critic

Combination of Policy Gradients and Value-Based. They estimate a value function or a Q-function and then they
improve the policy using something very similar to policy gradients. They calculate a gradient using value
functions and Q-functions. Diagram in fig:actor



    Actor-Critic Diagram

Model-Based RL

Estimate the transition model between states using  and . 

    Use the model for planning(no explicit policy) - Optimal Control or Planning techniques
    Use the model to improve policy by pushing gradients or using the model to generate some synthetic
        experience and plugging it into more standard model-free RL algorithms, which maybe can be any of  these three
        types of the model above.

Diagram model-based RL in fig:modelbased



    Model-Based Diagram


Slide 36-43

Tradeoffs


    Different tradeoffs
            Sample Efficiency: How many times are necessary to run the policy to correct collect samples.

            Stability and ease of use.
            Different assumptions
        
            Stochastic or deterministic?
            Continuous or discrete?
            Episodic or infinite horizon?
            Different things are easy or hard in different settings
        
            Easier to represent the policy?
            Easier to represent the model?
        
Sample Efficiency


    Sample efficiency: How many samples do we need to get a good policy? A sample means: Taking policy and run it
        and see what it does. 
    Is the algorithm off policy?
        
            Off policy: Able to improve the policy without generating new samples from that policy.
            On policy: Each time the policy is changed, even a little bit, we need to generate new
                samples.
        


    Sample Efficiency


fig:comparison shows a comparison between different algorithms according to sample efficiency.



    Sample efficiency for different algorithms

Stability and ease of use


    Does it converge? 
    And if it converges, to what?
    And does it converge every time?
    Supervised learning: Almost always gradient descent
    Reinforcement Learning: often not gradient descent
        
            Q-learning: Fixed Point Iteration
            Model-based RL: Model is not optimized for expected reward
            Policy Gradient: is gradient descent, but also often the least  efficient!
        

    Value function fitting
        
            At best, minimizes error of fit("Bellman error") 
                
                    Not the same as expected reward
                            At worst, doesn't optimize anything
                
                    Many popular deep RL value fitting algorithms are not guaranteed to converge to
                        anything in the nonlinear case.
                            Model-based RL
        
            Model minimizes error fit
                
                    This will converge
                            Not guarantee that better model = better policy
            Policy gradient
        
            The only one that actually performs gradient descent on the true objective.
        
Assumptions


    Common assumption 1: Full Observability -  Seeing states and not observations
        
            Generally assumed by value function fitting methods
            Can be mitigate by adding recurrence
            Common assumed 2: Episodic Learning - Delimit of trials. 
        
            Often assumed by pure policy methods
            Assumed by some model-base RL methods
            Common assumption 3: Continuity or Smoothness
        
            Assumed by some continuous value function learning methods
            Often assumed by some model-based RL methods
        
Examples of specific algorithms


    Value function fitting methods 
        Q-learning, DQN
        Temporal difference learning
        Fitted value iteration
        Policy gradient methods
        
            Reinforce
            Natural policy gradient
            Trust region policy optimization
            Actor-critic algorithms
        
            Asynchronous advantage actor-critic (A3C)
            Soft actor-critic(SAC)
            Model-based RL algorithms
        
            Dyna
            Guided policy search
        

